human beings are disconnected from their
own true self
the senses the mind the intelligence
requires to be in harmony with the heart
and with
the living force within the heart which
we call the the soul or the spirit
and when we understand the sacredness
the beauty
the eternal nature of our own spirit
then we can recognize it
in creation and we can recognize it in
others
when we don't
realize experience perceive the
sacredness of our own true self
then our perception is an illusion of
the world but when we understand who we
are and understand our harmony and
relationship with the world around us
and the people around us then we're
actually seeing everything
is true
[Music]
hey everyone welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a mild-mannered swami
from the suburbs of chicago but do not
let the calm demeanor fool you this guy
is having an outsized impact on the
world a best-selling author of multiple
books he has spent time with some of the
most powerful and or spiritually
influential people on the planet not
only do governmental officials seek him
out as a conduit to the people but he
spent time with mother teresa barack
obama and the dalai lama and that is
just scratching the surface of the
incredible people you can find him
surrounded by and it is no wonder given
the laundry list of contributions he's
already made to humanity including
helping to establish many missionary
hospitals eco-friendly farms eye camps
schools ashrams an orphanage and even a
number of emergency relief programs
additionally just one of his initiatives
serves more than 260
000 meals a day he has lived as a hermit
in the jungle dwelled in caves and at
the age of 31 took monastic vows
dedicating himself fully to helping
people the world over find fulfillment
so please help me in welcoming the
author of the journey within and the
journey home an autobiography of an
american swami the uncompromising
radhanat swamy
thank you so much for being here
it is
absolutely wonderful
so
the thing that i found so interesting in
researching you is your idea of the
difference between illusion and reality
and that so many people get lost in the
illusion and
i want to go in on that so
define the illusion how do people get
lost in it and what ultimately is the
reality
the sun is full of light full of heat
but if you turn your
face away from the sun
then you see a shadow
so that shadow is
illusion
but when we face toward the sun again we
see that everything is full of light
so
in the
bhagavad-gita it is said aham
sanskrit which means the supreme source
of everything
everything is emanating
so we believe in one supreme truth
as many names we could call god
and from that
everything exists
when we understand
in harmony with that truth what this
world is
then we actually see it from a spiritual
perspective and we see its inherent
spiritual
quality but when we're disconnected
really from our own true self
then we see everything
under the cloud or in the shadow of the
false eagle
and so so everything is potentially
spiritually
if we see it in perspective and in
relation and in harmony
with our own true spiritual nature
so let's break that down so as somebody
who at the beginning of my journey i
would have found that answer really
really um it would have felt out of
reach like there were too many parts
that i didn't yet understand so if we
can break those down so what is our true
self what is our true nature
we'll use another analogy a dream
let us say we're
dreaming that we're being attacked by a
tiger
in that condition we're really afraid
we're perspiring we may even be rolling
and screaming in our bed
now is that dream
real or illusion
the reality is we are having that dream
and the reality there are tigers
somewhere
the illusion is we're identifying with
it
we're thinking that that is me
in this dream and that tiger is is about
to eat me
but in
actuality the dream is real we're real
but when we're misidentifying
with that dream thinking that that's
happening to me now
then that's the illusion
in your book though you have a really
good example which is you're sitting on
a rock
in india if i remember correctly and a
black snake slithers out which would
immediately trigger me that this is
potentially a cobra and you said you
even had the thought of
there is a level i do actually need to
protect myself like there is some amount
of this is a real world that is a real
snake if it bites me i really will die
so as we're navigating that spiritual
awakening as we're because there's so
much talk um
certainly in your teachings which are an
echo of the word that i find impossible
to say the bhagi vat gita oh god i hope
i'm roughly close i've said it literally
a hundred times and i just i have so
much trouble with it
but in that so krishna is um all things
beautiful the creator of all things
beautiful something along those lines so
you put that together the the beautiful
side of things love and yet there is
also the tangible notion of danger is
real and so how do people navigate
between
finding a way to focus on the beautiful
so turning their face towards the sun
not living their life in the shadow
and at the same time
recognizing that to some extent you have
to function in life you have to be
afraid of the snake so where is that
line between the the dream world of
you're focusing on the wrong things
you're obsessing over things like loss
of money or status or things that that
are
the dream the perceived you're
seeing yourself as the one who either is
good or bad based on those fluctuations
but at the same time there is a line at
which it does become a real snake like
how do we navigate that that's the idea
of
yoga or true spirituality
to actually learn to live in harmony
with one's own self
we have this physical body
we have the mind and all of the thoughts
and emotions that come
through the mind
but who are who are we
i am seeing through my eyes i'm hearing
through my ears i'm touching through my
flesh i'm
tasting through my tongue i'm thinking
through my brain
and i'm loving through my heart but who
is that me
that me is
the essential consciousness
that's giving life
to every other aspect of our existence
our body and our mind do you see that
consciousness is universal
or is that unique to each individual
creature simultaneously both
that consciousness is you is unique
but it's part and parcel of
what is universal
and unless we understand that uniqueness
of our own
true consciousness then we can't really
appreciate
the universal
nature
and how we're all actually connected
everything is connected and everyone is
connected and everything and everyone in
this world is interdependent
and
emerson said
that the reason why there's so many
problems in this world
is because human beings are disconnected
from their own true self
the senses the mind the intelligence
requires to be in harmony with the heart
and with
the living force within the heart which
we call the soul or the spirit
and when we understand
the sacredness
the beauty
the eternal nature of our own spirit
then we can recognize it
in creation and we can recognize it
in
others
when we don't
realize experience perceive the
sacredness of our own true self
then
our perception is an illusion of the
world
but when we understand who we are and
understand our harmony and relationship
with the world around us and the people
around us then we're actually seeing
everything
as truth we're seeing as a spiritual
reality even in this world
okay i'm gonna um
the great news is because some of so
much of this i find simultaneously
intriguing and confusing
i will play the part of the audience and
try to to walk us through this so
um
you you have a really powerful story
about the redwood trees i think that's a
really important um piece of the
framework so if you can walk us through
that and then then i'm going to have
some additional questions after that
a few years ago i was with a friend
and we visited muir woods
in northern california
and we we go there every year together
and our purpose is to get away from kind
of everyone and everything and just
climb some mountains and be with the
redwood trees and
in quiet so as we were walking through
there was
a group of tourists
and we wanted to kind of walk by them as
soon as possible
there was a
forest ranger
who was speaking to them and as we were
rushing by the forest ranger said i want
to tell you
the underground secret
of the redwood
forest and i was a teenager in the 1960s
so i have this inclination to
underground secrets
so i told my friend let's just wait and
hear what he says
the forest ranger explained
that
in these forests
are the among the largest tallest
and oldest trees on the planet some of
these trees are 2 000 years old
they're growing on a hilly
terrain
the soil is very loose
and over the centuries there have been
massive earthquakes
windstorms snowstorms
how do these trees
keep
growing
through all of the different challenges
that have come
then he was quiet
and everyone was thinking
he said now i will tell you the
underground secret
the roots of the trees under the ground
reach out
to connect with the roots of other trees
and as soon as two roots meet
they embrace one another they wrap
around each other
in this way
he said
every tree in this entire forest is
directly or indirectly connected
and giving support to every other tree
the big gigantic ancient redwood trees
are reaching out
roots
and the little tiny redwood trees
they're just like threads the roots
they wrap around the big ones
and they get all their support
unity is strength
this is a lesson of nature for humanity
that in unity there is true strength
but we find if the branches wrap around
each other they're not going to have the
same
effect it's the roots
the roots support
and similarly the root of our of of our
consciousness really
is our hearts
that's where all the blood is pumping
from
and
the
heart is the sitting place
of love
when we connect to that love within our
hearts
than it expresses
as compassion
and this is the greatest need in the
world
to understand how we are all
interdependent with each other
what we have in common with each other
from a spiritual perspective life is
sacred and when we recognize that in
ourselves we recognize that sacred
potential in others
and then we live
whatever we may do
whether we're
swamis
or doctors or lawyers or accountants or
farmers or politicians
whatever our role may be in society
we're not trying to find happiness
through the things that we can get
but we actually understand that true
happiness is sharing
what we have within ourselves
that journey within
things
can give some amount of
satisfaction
to the physical senses and to the mind
but things can never give fulfillment to
the heart
all right so
taking that analogy of the the
interconnectedness at the root the
connectedness at the love if you will
that layer instead of the branches which
i think is really an interesting
distinction
i understand that and as a metaphor that
works really well for me um the part
that i
don't quite understand is you have the
individual self and then you have the
the self as it is interconnected to all
others
um
is it that the individual self well i
think i have two separate questions
about that so one i don't fully
understand
um the
it
from first principles i would guess that
in your tradition you would say that you
want to dissolve the sense of an
individual self but that doesn't
actually seem to be what you're saying
and then
the other side of the equation is
i need to to answer in my
words to make sure that i understand
this is is our true nature to be
seamlessly connected to
using your words all that is beautiful
is that our true nature
to go to the beginning of your question
self
is
sometimes defined as ego
it's our sense of identity
and in in our tradition
we
we want to dissolve
the false ego
which is our misconceptions of identity
and what do you think those are based on
like how do people get a false
identity but when we do that
then our true ego
actually
awakens
and it shines and it gives light in our
life into the world
so
we are the eternal
conscious spirit that's within us
the living force
and the living force is living
in
a body
and has
a mind
it's not that the living force is a body
and is the mind
something like when we drive a car
you know the car has such a wonderful
use at least potentially
and we have to keep the car really good
if we want it to to fulfill that
purpose
but still we're the driver in the car
we're seeing through the windshield
we're pushing the horn and making sounds
so similarly our true self is within
this body
and the false ego is when we forget
that we're all
a part of the supreme self
we're all
inherently
filled with the grace and the love of
the supreme self
and we think i'm just this body
and i'm just the the ever-changing
thoughts of the mind
and because of that there's so many
divisions
it's the cloud of ego that that
um
obscures
the son
of our true
nature our true love our true
consciousness so in this condition we're
thinking i'm a man or i'm a woman or i'm
black or white or red or yellow or brown
or
i'm
hindu or muslim or christian or jew or
jane or sikh or parsy or agnostic or
atheist or i'm a human being or i'm a
dog or a cat or or a
cow or a tree
we're identifying with these
designations as myself
but when we understand what my real self
is who i am
and what my real potential is
then
we actually respect that same sacredness
of being a part of god in everyone
everywhere
so i'm going to ask a question that may
be so weird to you as to be
unintelligible
but
is the purpose of reconnecting to your
true nature to
re-discover or uncover um see beyond the
illusion like whatever words are the
right words to get to the point where
you realize you're connected to that
that true eternal divinity um
[Music]
is that because one of course it would
bring out compassion and we would be
kinder and and better to each other
so part one is that that and then is
also a part of that just the neuro
chemistry of in this body of
feeling better like my real question
through a really western lens
is
is it better or on your side of the
fence like is it just
a more enjoyable place to be why do all
of this like it's a lot of work to go
live in caves and so like
why
why put on put in all that energy
ultimately we're all seeking pleasure
whether we're
the ceo of a corporation or head of a
government
or even the little ant that's on your
kitchen cabinet
wherever there's life there's a search
for pleasure
what is the origin of that whatever our
species whatever our
status in society we're all looking for
pleasure we're all trying to avoid
pain
why because pain interferes with our
search for pleasure
anandamayos
it is said in sanskrit
because the nature of
the spirit within us
is pleasure
that pleasure is
love
as we said before
things
cannot give fulfillment to the heart
it's only love
and being loved
that's the need of the heart and when
there's an emptiness of that love when
we're disconnected from that love
then we can try to find that experience
that pleasure in
so many things that could be even
harmful
power fame control accumulation of more
and more and more
but it never satisfies us
because
the example of the tree that we were
discussing if you put water on the root
of the tree that water naturally extends
to every part of the tree
if you just put water on a branch it's
not going to have that effect
things could give some pleasure
but love is what we're all truly
searching for
love is the most
powerful motivating force and in
whatever we may be
in this world if we're motivated by that
love that is within us
then we'll we'll perform our occupation
we'll perform our domestic family duties
with the best precision effectiveness
because
it's with compassion
so how do you begin to
uncover that so your your entirely
amazing book the journey within
how do you advise is probably a better
way to ask it how do you advise people
to go on that journey like it feels like
not the sum total of what you're trying
to accomplish because it's pretty clear
that
you're you're very efficient at
alleviating immediate pain
but in terms of helping people find that
spiritual awakening
what does that pursuit look like how do
people
begin or how do they recognize markers
on the path how do they know they're
making progress
a beginning
is
who we choose
to spend time with
there's a simple analogy if you take an
iron rod and put it in fire and keep it
there a little
it becomes red and hot like fire
and if if you touch that rod it's the
same as touching fire
and if you put the same rod in ice and
keep it there then it becomes as cold as
ice
so what we associate with
we so much become
influenced by that
and we see throughout the ages people's
spiritual awakening
is due to circumstances of life
where we feel
a need for something
deeper
something beyond
just all the
external experiences i'm having
there must be something more to life
than this
in india i'm in villages with very
simple poor people
and i'm also with millionaires and
billionaires and i really don't see too
much difference because if a person
doesn't find satisfaction
in their own hearts and in the purpose
of their life
they're not going to be happy people
whatever they have or whatever they
don't have because the real treasure is
within ourselves
so
when we feel that need
when we feel that
um
that purpose
in our life to find something deeper
something beyond
then
we connect with people who can inspire
enlighten us
to make that connection
and by being with enlightening people
people who are really positive
people who are
on a journey
on a journey to
engage whatever they have and whatever
they know
for a higher purpose within this world
then
our desire for that
is strengthened
it goes deeper and deeper
and then
the next
step
is sadhana
satsang is sanskrit which means to be
with enlightening people
sardara means when we have that we have
faith in something beyond we have faith
in our potential
and then we nourish that potential
with a spiritual practice
every day we nourish our body by eating
and
sleeping
and we nourish our minds by being with
people who encourage us who appreciate
us
who empower us
and we also need to nourish
our spirit
through a spiritual practice
meditation prayer in our tradition we
chant these beautiful mantras
of
divine names and these spiritual
practices
open up
our hearts to make a direct connection
with our true potential
with that love with that peace
what do you think about psychedelics as
a way to have breakthroughs like that i
know they've started experimenting with
cancer patients who are terminal that
are really having deep anxiety
over passing away and that there seem to
be some pretty profound effects and i
know you've spoken at burning man which
is pretty notorious for
the use of psychedelics
as a child of the 60s uh have you
experimented have you seen people try it
do you have any um
you know if somebody has very limited
time and they haven't had that
breakthrough is that something that um
you would ever
consider sort of yeah try it
[Laughter]
for the purpose of medics medical
reasons
you know
medications of various
forms you know could be beneficial
from the perspective of
self-realization or enlightenment
um
psychedelic
could potentially at the most
kind of
open one's awareness that there's
something beyond all this stuff that
everybody's
mixed up in this world
but it really can't take you beyond that
because
our true
spiritual nature
is our natural self
and it requires to be awakened through
spiritual
practice through savor
through
valuing
the
the opportunity to serve
rather than being a slave
of this
desire to exploit and consume
and
it's
when we actually come in contact with
enlightened people whether it be through
their books or through their
to their audience
and
you know through our own
intuition
when
when that
desire when that propensity awakens
within us for spiritual enlightenment
then we need
a spiritual
path a spiritual process by which we
awaken that
the
difficulty with psychedelics is
it may open a little door that there's
something beyond
but beyond that it could actually be a
serious distraction
we become dependent on a substance
rather
rather than awakening
our true self
i don't think i fully understand like
what a practice would look like so
reading your book obviously i get ideas
about what you did and the mantras and
chanting and being around other people
and exploring nature
in fact that's something i'd love to
know more about
so if
my one of the contributions i want to
make is to give people instruction
manuals so i'm obsessed with this idea
of like there are just some people for
whom until it gets to the point of step
one do this step two do this like it's
it's always going to remain sort of far
away
and
how do people
is
asked another way is there something
about being out in nature
walking through
with a mantra
that um has that effect of opening that
door and the the one experience that
really stood out to me in your book was
you were you were chanting and it you
said that it opened something inside of
you and you felt connected to that
eternal spirit and you said you expected
it to fade away but for some reason that
one was just it was deeper and more
profound than you'd ever had before
is there a way to work towards that is
it the repetition of the mantras is it
belief in the words behind the mantras
is it being out in nature like how can
people
you know really
walk that path that you're talking about
our spiritual practice is like a
foundation
it's kind of like charging your cellular
phone
you know there's so many functions that
a cellular phone has these days
but you need to charge it for all of
them to be activated
so we may have so many functions in our
life
with our families with our occupation
with the world around us with our health
but you know in order for
them to be spiritually connected
we need that connection
and that's what our spiritual practice
is for and that's what being with
enlightening people helps us with
and that's
prayer
meditation
in our meditation we chant this
beautiful mantra
and are you trying to clear your mind
when you meditate
are you trying to
soak in a certain feeling
remember that you're connected like if
you had to say in one sentence what the
purpose of
your particular meditation practice is
what is the the purpose
purification
excuse the example of the mind which you
just spoke
the mind is like a mirror
we're the self
and
we're seeing the world and we're seeing
ourselves through the mirror of our mind
we all have the experience time that
when we're agitated nothing really looks
good anymore
and when we're in really good mood kind
of everything looks good yes when you're
in a good mood the trees look so sweet
and when you're in a very bad mood you
know you just couldn't care less about
the trees
so we're seeing ourself
as a reflection
through the mirror of the mind and we're
seeing the whole world in a similar way
the purpose of the mirror is to see
ourself
but when the mirror is covered by layers
and layers of dust and dirt and debris
that's all we see is that dust and dirt
and debris what is the dust dirt and
debris what's it made of
selfishness
arrogance
envy
which creates depression
anger
greed
illusion
fear
these are all things that have collected
in our minds
and they're so much directing
our lives our words and our actions and
we're identifying so much with it
when we have obsessive greed
we're thinking if i get more and more
and more i will be happy
it may be fame it may be money it may be
power and control over
others when we have this
envy
then we're thinking by pushing somebody
else down
i'm putting myself up
so all of these
symptoms of this false ego
are like the dust and dirt of the mind
and when we're meditating when we're
chanting god's names
it's a process of cleaning the mirror of
the mind
to actually become free from these
unwanted things and then
from our very mind when it's clean we
see our true self
and we see the true equality of all
living beings and we see the beauty of
nature
inherently
everything's changing
you know we're born
we exist for some time we grow we may
produce offsprings but then inevitably
we grow old and we die
that's just the way nature is in this
world
but we see the inherent
eternal essence within ourselves and
within everything
and we try
we live with sadachar
when we make that connection through our
meditation through our prayer through
our spiritual practice and our mind
becomes
clean
then
we live
with character we live with values
that's the greatest need in the world
the value of compassion
the character of integrity
there's there's so much poverty in india
there's so much poverty in los angeles
there's poverty everywhere
it's it's not just because of
environmental problems
it's because of the way humans are
living
we're creating so many of the
environmental problems and we're
creating so much of poverty if we have
compassion
if we really care about each other
deeply
then each and every one of us whoever we
are we could make a difference
and that's
that's a life of values
whether we make a big difference or
whether we make a tiny little difference
doesn't make any difference
what really makes the difference is
we're doing what we can
with the value of compassion in our life
and then we're really contributing
something wonderful
and our life becomes wonderful to the
degree we contribute something wonderful
with love your journey was very
movement oriented which i find
fascinating and as somebody who thinks
in movies there's a moment in forrest
gump where
he has to put himself to movement in
order to sort of clear his mind so
in the 60s you're
feeling deeply unsettled by what's going
on in with the vietnam war and instead
of just protesting you you begin to move
and you're traveling around you end up
in greece you have this tremendous
calling i think you said um and you
begin your journey to spiritual india
like there was there's so much movement
in all of that um is there something to
that or is it just getting out of
all the things that create the illusion
the second part
it's
it's passing through all these things
that create illusion
to a higher goal to a higher purpose
which is
living an enlightened life
and each of us
is an individual
my
destiny we could say was to hitchhike
from london to the himalayas
to try to find
a deep meaningful purpose in my life
a connection with
with
spirituality with god
but i know people who don't go anywhere
and they get much more than me
it's it's not a matter of where we go
it's a matter of
how we try to
change our own hearts
it's not a matter of changing the
environment it's changing myself
a few days ago i was seeing people
surfing
and i was
reflecting how
life is very much like surfing
because the waves
a surfer can't change the wave
but a surfer can
adjust herself or himself
to the wave
so that
he or she keeps moving forward
and the environment around us
sometimes we can
control it to some extent
but there's a limit to that
happiness distress honor dishonor
pleasure pain
and the wave may be a wave where
everything is going our way and everyone
is praising us
or the wave may go or it seems like
everybody's abandoning us
nobody likes what i've done and
these are the waves of life that come to
everybody whoever we are
but yoga spirituality is meant
to help us to adjust our life
to whatever situation may be
so that we can move forward
that is
a wonderful
way to say that i love that
where can people learn more about you
by watching your show
that is amazingly kind
um
what's the impact that you want to have
on the world
my
greatest
aspiration
is
to be an instrument of god's grace
in whatever i do in my life i'm a very
small person
i haven't had a bank account since 1969
i haven't signed a check
i don't have
i only went to one semester of a junior
college
so i'm a little person
but
i found that the greatest wealth the
greatest achievement i can possibly
attain
is the opportunity
to humble myself
to be an instrument of grace to serve
others
i love that
thank you so much for being on the show
that was
extraordinary you are extraordinary
thank you it's very kind
guys
man
there's some people can create a certain
vibe that just is so rare in this world
and uh i really hope the way it feels in
this room right now comes across the
screen because it really was an
extraordinary ride
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
thank you again so much
in 10 15 20 years time and ask yourself
the question
is that where i want to be
and if the answer is no
then you need to find a new part
to just get to understand yourself you
don't know what you need in your life
until you figure out who you are